Here’s the mental model + the exact clicks to do each thing in Access.

1) Set a form’s Record Source (where the data comes from)

What it is: The query/table/SQL that supplies records to the form.

How:

Open the form in Design View (right-click form in Navigation Pane → Design View).

If the Property Sheet isn’t open: Design tab → Property Sheet.

Make sure you’re viewing Form properties:

Click the small square in the top-left corner of the form design grid (where rulers meet), or pick Form in the Property Sheet dropdown.

Property Sheet → Data tab → Record Source

Choose a table/query, or click the … button to open the Query Builder.

You can also type SQL directly (Record Source can be an SQL statement).

Tip: If you want a form that only shows one record (like an edit screen), use Default View = Single Form (Format tab).

2) Set properties (form-level and control-level)

Access properties are always “for whatever is currently selected.”

Form properties

Select the form itself (the top-left selector square).

Property Sheet tabs you’ll use a lot:

Format: Default View, Header/Footer, Scroll Bars, Record Selectors, Navigation Buttons

Data: Record Source, Allow Edits/Additions/Deletions, Data Entry, Filter

Event: On Load, On Current, Before Update, On Click, etc.

Other: Name, Recordset Type, Cycle

Control properties

Click the control (textbox, combo box, button, etc.).

Property Sheet tabs:

Data: Control Source (binding), Row Source (for combos), Default Value, Validation Rule/Text

Format: Visible, Enabled, Locked, Format, Conditional Formatting

Event: On Click, After Update, On Enter, etc.

Other: Name (important), Tab Stop, Tab Index

Common gotcha:

Locked = True means you can’t edit it

Enabled = False greys it out and prevents focus
Often you want Enabled=True, Locked=True for “read-only but not greyed out.”

3) Add bound controls (connected to a field)

What it is: A control whose value comes from (and can write back to) a field in the form’s Record Source.

Fastest way (recommended)

Ensure the form has a Record Source.

Design tab → Add Existing Fields

Drag a field onto the form.

Access creates a textbox + label.

The textbox is bound automatically.

Manual way

Design tab → Controls → choose Text Box and draw it.

Click the textbox → Property Sheet → Data tab → Control Source

Set Control Source to a field name like WorkName (or choose from dropdown).

Bound controls examples: Textbox, combo box, checkbox, etc., as long as Control Source points to a field.

4) Add unbound controls (not stored in a field)

Use these when: You want UI helpers, filters, calculations, buttons, headings, etc.

Unbound textbox (manual input not saved to table)

Add a textbox.

Leave Control Source blank.

Give it a useful Name (Other tab) like txtSearch.

Calculated control (still “unbound” in the sense it’s not a stored field)

Add a textbox.

Set Control Source to an expression, e.g.:

=[Qty]*[UnitPrice]

=Nz([FieldA],0)+Nz([FieldB],0)

Usually set Locked = True so users can’t type over the calculation.

Unbound combo box for filtering

Add combo box (use the wizard if you want).

Set Row Source (a query/list of choices).

Leave Control Source blank.

Use it in code/macros to filter the form.

Quick “how do I tell if it’s bound?”

Click the control → Property Sheet → Data tab:

Control Source = FieldName → bound

Control Source = (blank) → unbound

Control Source = =expression → calculated (not stored unless you write it back with code)

If you tell me what kind of form you’re building (data entry single-form, continuous list, or search/filter form), I’ll suggest the best set of form properties (Allow Additions, Data Entry, Cycle, navigation buttons, etc.) and the cleanest pattern for bound/unbound controls.